1976, Tryon, North Carolina. Butler King Cooper,
C-O-U-P-E-R, oceanographer, GS-14, retired
from the Old Bureau of Ships.
Before I retired from the Bureau of Ships, I made a
tape from an administrative history of the Bureau
of Ships during World War II, prepared by the
historical section of the Bureau of Ships, which I
think is now in the Washington Navy Yard. A copy of
this book, I feel sure, can be gotten at the NAVSEA
Library in National City in Arlington. where the
other officers that I will speak of are located.
The strike number is W-E-M-U-S-5-5-7,
Volume 4. Ms. Lucille Ockower, head of the library
in the National City, now Sea Library, will be able
to find it or get it for you.
I believe that offices are still established west
of the airport in Washington on highway number one
at National City in building three.
Carl Mayfield, M-A-Y-F-I-E-L-D, is probably
still the division head. Under him is a sonar
section. All this is sonar design. One of the
sections is under Kerry Smith, and under him is a
man by the name of Alfred Franceschetti. I'll
spell it. F-R-A-N-C-E-S-C-H-E-T-T-I.
He is the oceanographer for the Bureau of Ships
now, and in his file may be so many unclassified
items of interest, as the dates of different
programs and purports like Tenoch and likely
beginning of the informal Coordinating
Committee for Oceanography and other items of
that kind. I suggest that you consult Ms. Ockower
at the library for locations, code, and room
numbers that will help you in finding the sonar
design section of NAV CSEA.
And this tape are unclassified and were prepared
by the Bureau of Ships Historical Section, which I
believe now is located down at the Washington Navy
Yard.
It was my good fortune to be at Woods Hole from
August 1941
until February 1942 as a civilian. I then went into
the Navy as a specialist officer in charge of bathy
thermographs. While at Woods Hole, I had the
pleasure of working with Alfred Woodcock, who was
the first bathy thermograph observer on the
Atlantis, and Morris Ewing's brother, John
Ewing, a boy named Rusty Tyro, I think it was,
Tyrus. from Texas and myself for bathy
thermograph observers on the second cruise for
bathy thermograph observations across the Gulf
Stream and in the mixing area east of Nova Scotia in
September and October 1941. The first class of ten
engines each were sent to Woods Hole for training
and graduated before Pearl Harbor. I can remember
with considerable nostalgia the
you-take-this-one-I-take-that-one method by
which the boys determined which ocean they would
go into without any realization of what was ahead
for them. In February of 1942, I joined the Navy. I
was assigned to bureau of ships in the sonar design
section. The head of this section was then a
commander by the name of Rawson Bennett II. He
later became Rear Admiral Rawson Bennett and was
Chief of Naval Research when he retired or shortly
thereafter.
On this man and on the fact that Roger Revelle came
in from Scripps, in November of 42 hangs more
oceanography than history will probably ever be
able to record.
I have given to Dr. Calvert a copy of a memorandum
for file written by Rawson Bennett called
Oceanography in the Bureau of Ships, dictated in
1953 after it was all over. I stayed in the Bureau of
Ships from February 1942 until October of that
year, during which times the beginnings of the
many large contracts for bathy thermograph
procurement were initiated, and I was in charge of
riding herd on those contracts until I left the
Bureau in October. The Bristol Company at
Waterbury, Connecticut made the best ones and the
first ones, although the patent was held by the
Submarine Signal Company and it was necessary to
buy 500 bathy thermographs from them. although
they did very little of the actual technical parts
of the instrument, just finishing the brass
casings. But in that way, the patent costs and
royalties were settled. And the Bristol Company
put out the bathyr thermographs, which had been
handmade up to that time by Allen Vine, Morris
Ewing, and so on. If you will turn to a paper given In
October 1970, at the Silver Jubilee of the
Instrument Society of America, paper number
735-70,
The Mechanical Bathymograph and Historical
Review, by B.K. Cooper and Eugene C. LaFond, a good
part of the story of the early development of the
instrument will be taken care of. This paper and
Bennett's paper lay the background for a
coincidence, a fortunate coincidence, on which
the oceanographers have hung many a project. It
was the fact that a Navy need, that is, something to
help anti-submarine warfare, was met by a
mechanical device that the scientists had
developed to give an indication of the structure
of the upper layers of the sea temperature-wise.
This little piece of brass, which the scientists
could give to a naval officer and say, this will
help you in your war, opened the floodgates of
funding and the Navy was able, through Beership's
support, to carry out with the scientists the
recommendations of the Coal Pits Committee that
if the Navy wished to improve their
anti-submarine warfare detection
capabilities, they should learn all they could
about the ocean. It was almost a carte blanche as
far as projects were concerned. And during the
patriotic periods of the war, People from all
walks of life were dragged in or came in willingly
to be a part of the big anti-submarine warfare
effort. It is of interest that Lyman Spitzer, the
well-known astronomer, for instance, wrote the
first bathy thermograph instruction manual.
Many famous names in other lines of biology
geology, and other sciences today worked with the
anti-submarine warfare group during the war
wholeheartedly. And from their connection, as
the years came on later, the oceanography devices
and instruments of today developed as almost
linear descendants of the work of these people. In
addition to the fortunate coincidence of a need
and an instrument to fill it, there came together,
in November of 1942, Roger Revell from Scripps
Institution of Oceanography and Rawson Bennett
in the Bureau of Ships. Roger had direct orders to
the Hydrographic Office. but with his usual
wonderful ability to sense where the power lay, he
had additional orders to the Bureau of Ships. And
the old story is that he used to work all day in the
Bureau of Ships, then go to the Cosmos Club, sit
down with Mary Sears, who was a wave on duty at the
Hydrographic Office as a lieutenant commander,
and he would lay out for her the work that should be
done in the charting and the hydrographic areas
and the study of hydrographic stations at
hydrographic office and at 11 o'clock after
supper and with her instructions she would go home
to carry out his part of the work at the
hydrographic office until the next meeting. It
was a labor of love on both parts and worked
beautifully. Roger's immense grasp of the
situation, both for anti-submarine warfare and
his innate talent for being able to tell a naval
officer the kinds of work a scientist could do for
him to help him, plus the fact that Rawson Bennett
was a graduate not only of the Naval Academy, but
also of the University of California and could
talk to a scientist in mathematical terms on his
own level made it a very wonderful combination.
And this combination, in general, held right
straight on through Bikini when Roger left Joint
Task Force One to return to Scripps. It must be
remembered that a war was going on, ships were
being sunk off the coast at the rate of four and five
a night, and the scientists as well as the naval
officers had one aim in common. This did not,
however, prevent fundamental research from
going on to accomplish that problem. There used to
be, in the old days of the Navy contracts, a clause
which permitted the person at work to go back as far
as necessary in fundamentals to attain what was
needed. And if there was no fundamental, he could
go back and try to establish it. And on this general
principle hung a great deal of the basic research
that was difficult for the naval people later on to
understand. But during the war, it was all The
scientists were serving human purposes, just
like Spitzer did in writing that manual, far below
their capabilities in one sense, but were getting
a broadened outlook as to what could be done. And
the money was carried on. It even carried on after
the letdown, after World War II, because then came
Korea, and again the gates were opened, for
additional funding. And it was only far later on
when the Mayfield Amendment came up in which they
said everything had to be relevant to a stated Navy
need that the then operating Office of Research
had to begin to curtail its activities. It is
interesting to note and sometimes not so amusing
to the Office of Naval Research people than whom
there are no finer and to whom all honor should be
due for the research that has gone on in the ocean,
that the Bureau of Ships preceded the Office of
Naval Research in the general area and did the
funding of the contracts which the Office of Naval
Research later took over with Scripps, with Woods
Hole, and with Lamont Geological Observatory,
Columbia University, and so on. It irks the ONR
people when I say, from beer ships, before ONR, we
are. But to some extent, and to a large extent, in
fact, during the war, it was absolutely true.
former assistant secretary of the Navy, has given
a charming description in one of his papers of the
formation of ONR and has a lieutenant commander.
He thought there should be an assistant secretary
of the Navy for research, which came about with him
as a first incumbent after the war.
But going back again, it was the coincidence of two
brains, Ravel and Bennett, who could talk to each
other, Bennett, who could give him the official
go-ahead, and the wherewithal, Roger, who could
see the need and apply it. Believe it or not, out of
that section came such things as the only really
good defense against the kamikaze, and that were
the smoke pots that Roger had installed on the rear
of the ships, which could, under certain wind
conditions, could obscure the ship and help
divert the aim of the terrible kamikaze. That was
just one thing out of the realm of oceanography
that he was interested in. And the scope of his
interest ran from the bottom of the ocean to the top
of space. And he was as much in meteorology as he was
in oceanography in certain phases. Another group
that must be given their proper place are the 30
engines that were trained at Woods Hole, given one
bath of thermograph, a spool of wire, and a little
winch, and sent out to teach the admirals about
oceanography. Well, it didn't work very often,
and these boys were often and always incorporated
into the ship's company. And because they were
good officers, they made splendid records. One of
them received the Navy Cross. Many died, several
died in the line of duty. And their record is second
to none as a group. They did teach a great many naval
officers at least how to say bathymograph and
oceanography.
Union's development of the submarine
bathymograph, as recorded in the paper, and from
his own write-up of it, was the most important
thing in that there was a positive use that could be
made rather than an interpretation after the
fact. There was a positive use that could be made of
the instrument, and it was made by the
submariners, and it was welcomed by a great many of
them.
In the Pacific, at least, the success of the of the
program, which was carried out personally by Alan
Vine at the submarine headquarters at Pearl
Harbor, was that Joe Grenfell, later Vice Admiral
Grenfell, who at that time was operations officer
for Submarines Pacific under Admiral Lockwood,
Joe Grenfell would put on his summary of the cruise
report of the returning submarines a little
phrase like, The use of the Bathy thermograph was
noted with approval, which made all the submarine
skippers who got copies of their brothers'
reports see what is this instrument and treat it
with much more respect. Little things of this kind
were important in those days where things were
coming so fast. Among the people who were
important in the Pacific was Captain T.W. Rogers,
now retired, at Kanawha Street in Washington,
D.C., who was in charge of the Special Electronics
Section of the Maintenance
Correction, who was in charge of the Electronics
Division of the Service Force Pacific Fleet, his
special job being to personally, with his
assistance, approve the installation of
electronic equipment so that the fighting ships
got their equipment first rather than having it
wasted on coastal vessels. Under him, I went out as
a specialist officer in charge of the BT
installation program in the Pacific and was given
charge of about six officers on the ships in the
Pacific fleet. These men worked all the way from
Alaska to Australia and as I mentioned, were Woods
Hole train engines and they did a superb job.
I stayed on in the Navy one more year until 1946 and
was able to assist in the preparations and the
passage of the oceanographers and the baggage and
all of that group on their way to Bikini for the
great atom bomb test. was one important point in
connection with the procurement of bathy
thermographs in any quantity it was not
considered by the navy to be a scientific
instrument it was considered to be a component
that is a part a necessary part of a sonar equipment
just as a light bulb would be to do a particular
function and on that basis mass procurement was
possible and of course after the war these Those
that were left over were used for scientific
purposes. And during the war, as you can see if you
turn to the back of the Bathie Thermograph paper,
you could almost plot the progress of the war by the
Bathie Thermograph observations. There was one I
was very proud to see later at Scripps. It was 500
miles from Tokyo, and it was in 1942. And it was on
one of the ships of Doolittle's Tokyo raid.
But however you make a distinction between a
useful tool and an instrument,
the distinction was important to the
oceanographers. And as time went on after 1948,
the more basic part of the research and
development was taken over by the Office of Naval
Research and the applied research on which we
could at least foresee a Navy payoff was kept in the
Bureau of Ships where possible.
I've always thought the Bureau of Ships should
have kept the Marine Physical Laboratory at La
Jolla. It was set up by Bennett and his Admiral at
that time in order that there should be a feed
direct to the bureauships of the scientific minds
of the community. On that basis, three professors
were paid by the University of California, not the
Navy. They were Carl Eckert, Russell Raitt, and
Leonard Lieberman. These were four professors of
the University of California. Yet they were
assigned to the Marine Physical Laboratory, for
which the facilities and the operation and the
equipment were furnished by the Navy. And they
were stationed deliberately on the grounds of the
then Electronics Laboratory, Navy Electronics
Laboratory at Point Loma, for this close
collaboration in electronics and in instrument
development. When the Office of Naval Research
took it over, They were probably on more basic
programs. But at the same time, the information
had to be filtered through one more agency before
it got to the Bureau of Ships. However, the way at
that time that this was done, about 1950, was to
move the instrument groups and the hardware
groups, as the Navy liked to call them,
to the bureauships and the theoreticians and the
research groups to ONR. I have no real quarrel with
that decision, though I hate to see MPL leave the
bureauships. So the bureauships program
gradually dwindled on down until it became about a
$3 million, $3 to $4 million program, but at its
best perhaps in many ways because the Navy
laboratories themselves under that program were
given a measure of freedom for basic research,
sometimes equal to that which the Naval Research
Laboratory itself could provide. I used to argue
with the naval officers and the appropriation
persons that under any contract, at least 30% of
the funds should go for basic research to support
the projects which were named in hardware. And
they were very generous most of the time. Also, by
taking advantage of funds that had been unused by
different departments and the bureauships, in
the early days it was possible to get chunks of
money from the oceanographers at the Navy
laboratories because we could say it was ready to
be spent at any time, whereas if you had to go out to a
contractor, we would not be able to appropriate to
contract the money to be spent within the time
limit before the appropriation ran out. It was
always enjoyable to see the way that the people at
the Navy Electronics Laboratory Oceanographic
Section in those days used such chunks of money.
Out of such things came the Oceanographic Tower
and many, many things of that kind. And Dr. LaFond,
Bob Dietz, Bob Dill, Ed Hamilton, many, many more
deserve all kinds of credit. for the good use and
imaginative use to which they put that work. I'm
very proud of the program that the Bureau of Ships
had, and we can discuss that later. Now let's go
back to World War II, and let me play for you the
words as I read them from the book, which you can
find yourself if you wish to go into it further.
Remember, the Bureau of Ships was a material
crowd, not a research crowd, and yet you will read
through it all that a great many new and wonderful
things were being discovered because of the
sincere effort and unrestrained effort of minds
from all walks of life. So here is the recording.
Research
and Development during World War II, the
introductory paragraph, quote. When surveying
the fundamental reasons for the Allied victory in
World War II, World War II, Volume 4, Library
Stack, WEMU, colon, S557, Volume 4. Beginning on
page 127, Research and Development During World
War II, the introductory paragraph, quote, When
surveying the fundamental reasons for the Allied
victory in World War II, naval historians and
officers of the line conclude alike and without
qualification that the research and development
program carried out under the U.S. Navy's
jurisdiction proved to be unsurpassed by any
other one single factor in contributing to our
operational successes. Now going over to page
130, the beginning of a report
Commander-in-Chief, U.S. Fleet to the Secretary
of Navy, dated 8 December 1945. Several
paragraphs. The first, quote, In December 1941,
the United States faced seasoned enemies who not
only had long been preparing for war, but who had
actually been waging it for several years. Within
the limited facilities and means available
throughout the years of peace, the United States
Navy had, however, equipped itself with weapons
the equal of or superior to those of other navies,
and had laid the groundwork for still further
development. During the war, the science and
industry of this country and our allies was
mobilized to apply existing scientific
knowledge to the perfection of these weapons and
the development of new and more deadly means of
waging war. As a result, the United States Navy was
able to maintain the technical advantage over the
navies of our enemies, which contributed so
materially to the outcome of World War II. Page
131. The means of accomplishing this were not so
much directed toward making new discoveries as
toward the exploitation of the skills and
techniques which civilian scientists had
already cultivated in years of peace. When war
appeared imminent, The War and Navy departments
and the National Academy of Sciences gave close
attention to the most profitable manner of
utilizing the strength of American science in
military and naval research. It was decided to
attempt a solution involving the maximum
flexibility and initiative, in which the
fundamental principle would be cooperation
between science and the armed forces, rather than
to bring the scientists into military and naval
laboratories, as was done in England. The
principle proved thoroughly sound. The
arrangements adopted was the establishment by
executive order of the Office of Scientific
Research and Development, which has as its
scientific and technical working bodies the
National Defense Research Council, the Medical
Research Council, and later the Office of Field
Service. To assure full integration of the
potentialities of these organizations with the
Navy's own research and development program and
the needs of the service, the late Secretary Knox,
in July 1941, established the Office of
Coordinator of Research and Development.
Throughout the war, the development of new
weapons and devices has been accelerated by the
teamwork between the users, the scientists, the
engineer designers, and the producers. The
devices and weapons resulting from the research
and development program have been put to use in
every phase of naval warfare. Particular
examples cited because of their complexity and
diversification are amphibious warfare,
carrier warfare, submarine and anti-submarine
warfare. In each of these cases, our combat
effectiveness has been materially increased by
improvements in communications, navigational
devices, fire control, detection equipment,
firepower, aircraft performance, range, speed,
armament, handling characteristics, and by
advanced training and methods and equipment.
Perhaps the greatest technological advances of
the entire war have been made in the field of
electronics , both within the naval laboratories
and in collaboration with the Office of
Scientific Research and Development. The
pre-existing radar sets were developed and new
models created for ship and airborne search, fire
control, and for accurate long-range
navigation. Identification recognition
equipment were developed for use in conjunction
with radar systems. New and highly efficient
short-range radio telephones were used for
tactical communication. In the successful
anti-submarine campaign in the Atlantic, small
radio sonobuoys were used. These, when dropped
from aircraft, listened for the noise made by a
submarine and automatically relayed the
information to the searching plane. Great
strides have been made in electronic
anti-submarine detection equipment.
Underwater echo ranging gear and listening
equipment have been improved in quality and
extended in function since the outbreak of the
war. Countermeasures have been developed for
jamming enemy radar and communication systems,
disrupting the control of signals for his guided
missiles and counteracting his measures to jam
our own equipment.
New paragraph. The late war, more than any other,
involved the interplay of new and technical
measures and opposing countermeasures. For
example, the German U-boats had to revise their
tactics and equipment when we began to use radar on
our anti-submarine aircraft, and we in turn had to
modify our tactics and radar equipment to counter
their changes.
Let it run out to the end and then turn over this
tape. Let it run out to the end, then turn over this
tape. We're about at the end now.
Almost there.